Gossip PING/PONG control messages (#1)
Nashatyrev/libp2p-specs: pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.2.md

# Gossipsub v1.2

# Overview

This document aims to provide a minimal extension to the [gossipsub
v1.1](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.1.md)
protocol.

The proposed extensions are backwards-compatible and aim to add utility control messages for 

> better network efficiency (delivery latency and total throughput) tuning of gossip protocol 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
better network efficiency (delivery latency and total throughput) tuning gossip protocol 
```

implementations 

In more specific terms, new control messages are introduced: `PING` and `PONG`. 
They are primarily intended for collecting statistics to estimate peer connection 
latency and bandwidth and adjusting message broadcasting strategy accordingly.

# Specification

## Protocol Id

Nodes that support this Gossipsub extension should additionally advertise the
version number `1.2.0`. Gossipsub nodes can advertise their own protocol-id
prefix, by default this is `meshsub` giving the default protocol id:
- `/meshsub/1.2.0`

## Parameters

This section lists the configuration parameters that needs to agreed on across clients to avoid
peer penalizations

| Parameter         | Description                                                            | Reasonable Default |
|-------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| `max_ping_rate`   | maximum number of `PING` messages per minute      | 60                 |

## PING/PONG Messages

### Sender

> Sender MAY send `PING` message (either standalone or piggy tailing) at any time. Sender is free choose 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sender MAY send `PING` message (either standalone or piggy tailing) at any time. Sender is free to choose 
```

any `id` however it might be reasonable to select unique numbers across the session. 

Sender MUST NOT send `PING` message to a peer if `max_ping_rate` `PING` message were already sent 
to that peer during the last minute.

An implementation is free to choose a reasonable timeout (e.g. 60 seconds) for waiting for a corresponding 
`PONG` message. However it is worth considering that a `PONG` message might be 

> [... blocked by another message which is already on the wire] and not setting the timeout too small.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[... blocked by another message which is already on the wire, thus the timeout should not be too small.
```

> If a `PONG` timeout occurs that SHOULD be treated as protocol malfunction and the peer connection 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PONG` timeout exceeding SHOULD be treated as protocol malfunction and the peer connection 
```

Reviewer: A question: if any other message is received from a remote peer, should it reset the timeout? For instance, if a channel was busy by transmitting a big message from a slow peer a `PONG` might be too late and cause disconnection by timeout. I think defining a recommended timeout value in the spec should be useful

SHOULD be closed  

### Responder

Upon receiving a `PING` message the responder
- MUST respond with a `PONG` message with the same `id` value
- SHOULD check if the `max_ping_rate` is respected by sending peer (otherwise the peer MAY be penalized)
- SHOULD make his best to respond back with a corresponding `PONG` as soon as possible. That means:
  - SHOULD NOT queue the message for later send (e.g. on heartbeat or piggy tailing for a next publish message)
  - if there are messages queued for sending to the peer that queue SHOULD be disregarded and the 
    the `PONG` message should be flushed immediately

### Usage scenarios

#### Latency estimation

> This is the most obvious and basic scenario of Ping/Pong usage. Gossip implementation may use the estimated 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the most obvious and basic scenario of Ping/Pong usage. Gossip implementation may use estimated 
```

better network efficiency (delivery latency and total throughput) tuning of gossip protocol 
implementations 

In more specific terms, new control messages are introduced: `PING` and `PONG`. 
They are primarily intended for collecting statistics to estimate peer connection 
latency and bandwidth and adjusting message broadcasting strategy accordingly.

# Specification

## Protocol Id

Nodes that support this Gossipsub extension should additionally advertise the
version number `1.2.0`. Gossipsub nodes can advertise their own protocol-id
prefix, by default this is `meshsub` giving the default protocol id:
- `/meshsub/1.2.0`

## Parameters

This section lists the configuration parameters that needs to agreed on across clients to avoid
peer penalizations

| Parameter         | Description                                                            | Reasonable Default |
|-------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| `min_ping_period` | minimal delay between sending next `PING` and previous received `PONG` | 1 second (?)       |

> | `max_ping_rate`   | (better alternative) maximum number of `PING` messages per minute      | 60                 |

Reviewer 2: max_ping_rate does seem better, but 60/min is far too low
If we ping every other RTT with 20ms ping, we are already at 25ping/s

Author: Ok will leave `max_ping_rate `
>  but 60/min is far too low

Yep, but this a 'reasonable default' for normal Libp2p usage 😆 
We will adjust this option for Eth2 when we need

 * [either `min_ping_period` or `max_ping_rate`]

## PING/PONG Messages

### Sender

Sender MAY send `PING` message (either standalone or piggy tailing) at any time. Sender is free choose 

> any `id` however it might be reasonable to select unique numbers across the session. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe unpredictable by the other peer? Avoids weird attacks I guess

Author: Do you think there could be any security implications?

`PONG` message (if any). [or alternatively respect `max_ping_rate`]

An implementation is free to choose a reasonable timeout (e.g. 60 seconds) for waiting for a corresponding 
`PONG` message. However it is worth considering that a `PONG` message might be 
[... blocked by another message which is already on the wire] and not setting the timeout too small.
If a `PONG` timeout occurs that SHOULD be treated as protocol malfunction and the peer connection 
SHOULD be closed  

### Responder

Upon receiving a `PING` message the responder
- MUST respond with a `PONG` message with the same `id` value
- SHOULD check if the `min_ping_period` is not violated (otherwise the peer MAY be penalized)
  [or alternatively `max_ping_rate` is not voilated]
- SHOULD make his best to respond back with a corresponding `PONG` as soon as possible. That means:
  - SHOULD NOT queue the message for later send (e.g. on heartbeat or piggy tailing for a next publish message)
  - if there are messages queued for sending to the peer that queue SHOULD be disregarded and the 
    the `PONG` message should be flushed immediately

> ### Usage scenarios

Reviewer 2: Can also talk about the connection "keep alive" (or keep warm I guess)

Author: Oh, that's actually too weird use case from my perspective. 
I'm not sure that dirty hack is worth mentioning in libp2p spec 😆
